# Introduction

As you learned, **JavaScript** is a hosted language. That means **JavaScript** itself can be implemented in different environments.

**Node.js** is essentially the extracted V8 engine Chrome offers, enriched by extra APIs. So its that engine you know from the browser; but instead of the browser APIs, it has access to other APIs and it runs outside of the browser. This is **Node.js**. We don't work with DOM and storage in this course.

You can download **Node.js** app in <https://nodejs.org/en/> website. If you are using other OS, use these commands:

- `sudo apt-get install nodejs` for Ubuntu
- `pkg install nodejs` for Android (via termux app)
- `pacman -Syu nodejs npm` for Arch Linux
- `pkg install node` for FreeBSD
  - Or compile it on your own using `ports`: `cd /usr/ports/www/node && make install`
- `emerge nodejs` for Gentoo
- `yum install nodejs14` for IBM i

Other installations are in [this](https://nodejs.org/en/download/package-manager/) link.

## What will you learn in this course?

There are lots of topics to learn:

1. **JavaScript** Refresher
2. **Node.js** Basics
3. Efficient Development
4. Using Express.js
5. Templating Engines
6. Model-View-Controller
7. Advanced Routes & Models
8. Node + SQL (MySQL)
9. Using Sequelize
10. Node + NoSQL (MongoDB)
11. Using Mongoose
12. Sessions & Cookies
13. Authentication
14. Sending E-Mails
15. User Input Validation
16. Error Handling
17. File Uploads & Downloads
18. Pagination
19. Async Requests
20. Handling Payments
21. REST API Basics
22. Advanced REST API Features
23. Using async / await
24. Websockets & Socket.io
25. GraphQL
26. Deployment
27. Testing
28. Beyond Web Servers
29. Modern **JavaScript** and **Node.js**
30. Node + **TypeScript**
31. Deno

## REPL

What is REPL, it's stands for **R**ead, **E**valuate, **P**rint, **L**oop. Once you download and install **Node.js**, you can use it everywhere (outside of browser) or you can use it in terminal or command prompt (cmd) with `node` (or `node.exe`) command. As you know, **Node.js** is very similar to **JavaScript**. When you use `node` in temminal (or cmd), now you're in the REPL (which start with `>` in terminal). But don't want to use **Node.js** in terminal. Instead we can use Vs Code to execute files and use it for real apps. Terminal usage is a great playground. But as we said, we want to use Vs Code.

## Writing Node.js Code

We can execute some code with `node <file-name>.js` command; let's make an `app.js` file and write some code:

```js
console.log("Hamid");

node app.js
// "Hamid"
```

If you remember, we worked with `webpack`. Most of them are compatible with **Node.js** and browser doesn't know them and they of course do not run inside of a browser (e.g. `module.exports` or `require...` and so on). Behind the scenes, `webpack` uses **Node.js** to read in our file.

We said **browser doesn't know them**, that means:

```js
document.getElementById("my-id");

node app.js
// ReferenceError: document is not defined
```

## Work with File System

As you know before, you can use **JavaScript** in Browser-side and Other-side (e.g. server-side).

> in browser-side:

- **JavaScript** was invented to create more dynamic websites by executing in the browser! That's the origin of **JavaScript**.

- **JavaScript** can manipulate the HTML code, CSS, send background HttpRequests and allows interaction with web page and browser APIs (e.g. get user location) and much more.

- **JavaScript** **can't** access the local filesystem (interact with the operating system etc.).

> in other-side (e.g. server-side like Node.js):

- Google’s **JavaScript** Engine (V8) extracted to run **JavaScript** anywhere (called **Node.js**).

- **Node.js** can be executed on any machine and is therefore often used to build web backends (server-side **JavaScript**).

- **Node.js** **can** access the local filesystem, interact with the operating system etc. It **can't** manipulate HTML or CSS.

We access the local filesystem or interact with the operating system with `fs`, for example:

```js
const filesystem = require("fs");

or

import filesystem from "fs"; // need module type (ES6+)
```

We can write a (write to file) file with `filesystem.writeFileSync()`, this method takes two parameters, the **first one** is the file name or the specific path, the **second one** is for data (data includes everythings):

```js
const filesystem = require("fs");

filesystem.writeFileSync("hamid.txt", "Hello persian sight");
```

You can learn more in `NodeJS Basics.md` file.

Don't worry, please before reading this part (rest of the filesystem part), read the **JavaScript** basics. But you can also see our page in github in these following link:

1. <https://github.com/Hamidalavi/Javascript-tips>
2. <https://github.com/Hamidalavi/JavaScript-step-by-step>
