# Error Handling

In this file, you will learn about: Error Handling

Different types of errors:

- Technical / Network Errors (e.g. MongoDB server is down)
- Expected Errors (e.g. File can't be read, database operation fails)
- Bug / Logical Errors (e.g. User object used when it doesn't exist)

Consider this example:

```js
const sum = (a, b) => {
  return a + b;
};

console.log(sum(1, 2)); // 3
console.log(sum(1)); // NaN
```

We can handle this error with built-in `Error` **JavaScript** object. For example:

```js
const sum = (a, b) => {
  if (a && b) {
    return a + b;
  }
  throw Error("Invalid argument");
};

console.log(sum(1, 2)); // 3
console.log(sum(1)); // Error: Invalid argument
```

Some packages also have this Error object behind the scenes, for example MongoDB will throw an error if it can't connect or if an operation fails.

But sometimes we can't handle some errors, for example our server crashed or we are getting stuck and that refresh icon in the browser kept on spinning and nothing happened; that was because our server crashed, because we had an error which we did not handle. How can we handle errors?

For some synchronous code, such code can be wrapepd with `try..catch`. For example:

```js
const sum = (a, b) => {
  if (a && b) {
    return a + b;
  }
  throw Error("Invalid argument");
};

try {
  console.log(sum(1)); // "Invalid"
} catch (error) {
  console.log("Invalid");
}
```

In this code, our code would not break our entire project and not crashes with our error. If we add an another `console.log()` here, it'll works normally:

```js
const sum = (a, b) => {
  if (a && b) {
    return a + b;
  }
  throw Error("Invalid argument");
};

try {
  console.log(sum(1)); // "Invalid"
} catch (error) {
  console.log("Invalid");
}

console.log("I'm worked");
```

Now here we have a look at an error and synchronous code throwing an error which we can handle with `try..catch`.

So what about asynchronous code? Such operations when using promises are handled with `then..catch`. `then()` block where we handle the case that the database operation succeeded, but we then also have a `catch()` block where we catch any errors that happened. So this is `try..catch`, just with async code.

`then()` block is our success case and `catch()` block allows us to execute code if that fails. `catch()` by the way collects all errors that are thrown by any prior `then()` blocks. So if we had more than `then()` blocks in our chain, `catch()` would fire on any error thrown in any `then()` block or any operation executed in a `then()` block.

For example, with working with databases, we can redirect the user to the `500.ejs` page with `catch()` block instead of rendering this page in `then()` with `if` statements.

## Modern Error Handling

Consider:

```js
abcd // asynchronous code
  .then(result => {
    console.log(result);
  })
  .catch(err => {
    console.log(err);
  });
```

Instead of using this way, we want to use another way:

```js
abcd // asynchronous code
  .then(result => {
    console.log(result);
  })
  .catch(err => {
    const error = new Error("Hamid");
    error.statusCode = 500;
    return next(error);
  });
```

When we call `next(error)`, we let express know that an error occurred and it will skip all other middlewares and move right away to an error handling middleware.

We can use it when we pass four arguments in our middlewares, for example:

```js
app.use((error, req, res, next) => {
  res.(500).redirect("/500");
});
```

Now if the error occurrred, the user will be redirected to the `500.ejs` page.

**Note**: If you got more than one error-handling middleware, they'll execute from top to buttom. Just like the **normal** middleware.

## Some Notes

In synchronous places (i.e. outside of callbacks and promises), we throw an error (`throw new Error("err")`) and express will detect this and execute our next error handling middleware. Inside of async code (i.e. inside of `.then()`, `.catch()` or callbacks), `throw new Error("err")` does not work however. Inside of that, we have to use `next(new Error(err))`. This is then detected by express again.

## Status Code

- 2xx (Success, e.g. 200 and 201): These are always success status code. They indicate that the operation succeeded.
- 3xx (Redirect): Which indicates that a redirection happened.
- 4xx (Client-side error): An error wase done by the client (e.g. incorrect data was entered into a form, then we return this `422` error code).
- 5xx (Server-side error): Which indicates that a server-side error occurred.

---

- 200: Operation succeeded
- 201: Success, resource created
- 301: Moved permanently
- 401: Not authenticated
- 403: Not authorized (might be authenticated, but we were still not allowed to do that specific operation)
- 404: Not found
- 422: Invalid input
- 500: Server-side error

**Mote**: A status code does not mean that the request failed or that the app crashed.

Another status code is in [this](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status) and [this](https://httpstatuses.com/) links.

## More Status Code

1×× Informational

100 Continue

101 Switching Protocols

102 Processing

2×× Success

200 OK

201 Created

202 Accepted

203 Non-authoritative Information

204 No Content

205 Reset Content

206 Partial Content

207 Multi-Status

208 Already Reported

226 IM Used

3×× Redirection

300 Multiple Choices

301 Moved Permanently

302 Found

303 See Other

304 Not Modified

305 Use Proxy

307 Temporary Redirect

308 Permanent Redirect

4×× Client Error

400 Bad Request

401 Unauthorized

402 Payment Required

403 Forbidden

404 Not Found

405 Method Not Allowed

406 Not Acceptable

407 Proxy Authentication Required

408 Request Timeout

409 Conflict

410 Gone

411 Length Required

412 Precondition Failed

413 Payload Too Large

414 Request-URI Too Long

415 Unsupported Media Type

416 Requested Range Not Satisfiable

417 Expectation Failed

418 I'm a teapot

421 Misdirected Request

422 Unprocessable Entity

423 Locked

424 Failed Dependency

426 Upgrade Required

428 Precondition Required

429 Too Many Requests

431 Request Header Fields Too Large

444 Connection Closed Without Response

451 Unavailable For Legal Reasons

499 Client Closed Request

5×× Server Error

500 Internal Server Error

501 Not Implemented

502 Bad Gateway

503 Service Unavailable

504 Gateway Timeout

505 HTTP Version Not Supported

506 Variant Also Negotiates

507 Insufficient Storage

508 Loop Detected

510 Not Extended

511 Network Authentication Required

599 Network Connect Timeout Error

## Summary

**Types of Errors and Handling Errors**:

- You can differentiate between different types of errors - technical errors (which are thrown) and expected errors (e.g. invalid user input).
- Error handling can be done with custom `if`-checks, `try..catch`, `.then().catch()` and etc.
- We can use the Express error handling middleware to handle all unhandled errors.

**Errors and Status Code**:

- When returning responses, it can make sense to also set an appropriate Http status code - this lets the browser know what went wrong.
- We got success (2xx), redirect (3xx), client-side errros (4xx) and server-side errors (5xx) codes to choose from.
- Setting status codes does not mean that the response is incomplete or the app crashed!

## Important Thing

The status code is very useful for REST API section. We cover it later in next topics.

## Useful Resources & Links

- Error Handling in Express.js - Official Docs: <https://expressjs.com/en/guide/error-handling.html>
