# REST API Basics

In this file, you will learn about: REST API Basics

Consider the Twitter and some apps, these apps don't work with server-side rendered HTML code. They don't need a template language on the server to render the HTML code; because they use UI libraries instead. So not every front-end (UI) requires HTML pages.

Front-end is decoupled from the the back-end (server). It means that, we don't want to get any user inerface, instead we only need to exchange or transfer data.

REST stands for **Re**presentational **S**tate **T**ransfer.

**Important**: Only the response and the request data changes, **not** the general server-side logic!

You don't need to learn lots of things. We just reuse 99% our of the knowledge to working with REST API.

## Accessing Data with REST APIs - Data Format

There are some different format for accessing data:

|HTML|Plain Text|XML|JSON|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|`<p>Node.js</p>`|Node.js|`<name>Node.js</name>`|`{"title": "Node.js"}`|
|Data + Structure|Data|Data|Data|
|Contains UI|No UI Assumptions|No UI Assumptions|No UI Assumptions|
|Unnecessarily difficult to parse if we just need the data|Unnecessarily difficult to parse, but clear data structure|Machine-readable but relatively verbose; XML-parser needed (with very extra text to read the core data)|Machine-readable and concise; can easily be converted to **JavaScript**|

## Routing

How do we communicate between client and server? We send a request from the client to the server and how we do that?

Before, we did adding a link on our HTML page or we had a form with a button and we defined the form action and the method.

In REST API, we still send the request to a combination of HTTP method (called HTTP verb) and a path on the server. For example, `POST/post` or `GET/posts` or `GET/posts/:postId`.

## HTTP Methods (HTTP Verbs)

In HTML content there are just two methods available, `GET` and `POST`. For example in forms and links, we only have `GET` and `POST` available. These are the two methods the browser natively knows or the browser HTML elements know.

When using asynchronous requests through **JavaScript** or when building mobile apps and so on, we have access to more HTTP methods:

- `GET`: Get a resource from the server.
- `POST`: Post a resource to the server (i.e. create or append resource).
- `PUT`: Put a resource onto the server (i.e. create or overwrite a resource). `POST` will never overwrite.
- `PATCH`: Update parts of an existing resource on the server. Not overwrite it entirely necessarily but update parts of it.
- `DELETE`: Delete a resource on the server.
- `OPTIONS`: Determine whether follow-up request is allowed (sent automatically).

## Core Principles

- **Uniform Interface**: Clearly defined API endpoints with clearly defined request + response data structure. In other world, our API should be predictable and if possible and if open to the public, it should be documented.

**Note**: Endpoints means that the combination of HTTP methods and paths.

- **Stateless Interactions**: Server and client don't store any connection history, every request is handled separately.
- **Cachable**: Servers may set caching headers to allow the client to cache responses.
- **Client-Server**: Server and client are separated, client is not concerned with persistent data storage.
- **Layered System**: Server may forward requests to other APIs.
- **Code on Demand**: Executable code may be transferred from server to client.

## Create REST API Project

First of all, we need to add `express` and `body-parser` here with `npm install --save express body-parser` and create our basic scripts:

```js
// app.js - in main root
const app = require("express")();
const feedRoutes = require("./routes/feed");

app.use("/feed", feedRoutes);

app.listen(8080);
```

```js
// feed.js - in `routes` folder
const express = require("express");
const feedController = require("../controllers/feed");

const router = express.Router();

// GET /feed/posts
router.get("/posts", feedController.getPosts);

module.exports = router;
```

```js
// feed.js - in `controllers` folder
exports.getPosts = (req, res, next) => {};
```

These files are for starting our project. So any incoming request that starts with `/feed` will make it into `feedRoutes` routes.

**Note**: Don't worry, we don't used new syntax. It's just a MVC pattern, the difference is that we don't need View here (is MC).

In this file, we don't use `res.render()` anymore, because we want to work with data. So we'll not render a View. Instead, we'll return a `json` response:

```js
// feed.js - in `controllers` folder
exports.getPosts = (req, res, next) => {
  res.status(200).json({
    post: [{ title: "First product", content: "A greate book" }]
  });
};
```

We call `res.json()` and this will send a JSON reponse.

**Important**: To work with data, status code is very important here. So need to add this.

The compressed code is:

```js
// feed.js - in `controllers` folder
exports.getPosts = (req, res, next) => {
  res.status(200).json({
    post: [{}]
  });
};
```

Now if we go the <http://localhost:8080/feed/posts> address, we would see our data there; and if we go the **Network** tab in developer tools, we see the **Content-type** that has a `application/json` value. Because we used `res.json()` which is provided by `express` framework.

But users can see our data, we want to avoid that.

## Creating our First Product

Let's create new a controller for creating a post:

```js
// feed.js - in `controllers` folder
exports.createPost = (req, res, next) => {
  const title = req.body.title;
  const content = req.body.content;
  res.status(201).json({
    message: "Post created successfully!",
    post: { id: new Date().toISOString(), title, content }
  });
};
```

For parsing those data (i.e. `title` and `content`) from request body, since we don't want to work with HTML content or templating engine, we parse our `title` and `content` on request body in different way.

First of all, we need to import `body-parser` package in our project. This time we don't want to use `.urlencoded({})` here; default data and defualt `x-www-form-urlencoded` format has if submitted through a form post request. So we don't need form data. Instead we use `.json()` method which is able to parse JSON data from incoming requests. This format is set to `application/json`; and this is how the data will be appended to the request that reaches our sever.

```js
// app.js
const bodyParser = require("body-parser");

app.use(bodyParser.json());
```

## Postman

Now you're wondering that how can we parse them on the request body or how can we extract them from request body? We can't create a form in which we submit. Instead we can use a very handy special tool and that is **postman**.

We can signup for free in [this](https://www.postman.com/) website. Or we can download it from [this](https://www.postman.com/downloads/) link.

We want to work with postman application. First of all, you need to signin to sync your data.

To set the name of the body, we need to do some steps:

1. Clicking on `Create a request` button or `+` in above
2. Setting method as `POST` and entering our URL (to create a new post)
3. Going to `Body` tab and selecting the `raw` radio button (for data format)
4. Finally we select the data format. So we want to work with `JSON` data.

Before we continue, let's create a route for creating a post:

```js
// feed.js - in `routes` folder
const express = require("express");
const feedController = require("../controllers/feed");

const router = express.Router();

// GET /feed/posts
router.get("/posts", feedController.getPosts);

// POST /feed/post
router.post("/post", feedController.createPost); // <-- this line

module.exports = router;
```

Now we can pass these two fields (keys) to our server. For example:

```json
{
    "title": "Working with postman",
    "content": "This is great handy tools for me"
}
```

This is now our request, we can send it to server with clicking on `Send` button. After that we'll see:

```json
{
    "message": "Post created successfully!",
    "post": {
        "id": "2021-01-11T10:57:32.134Z",
        "title": "Working with postman",
        "content": "This is great handy tools for me"
    }
}
```

**Important**: If you failed to back a response from the your server, you need to pass a correct path like `http://localhost:8080/feed/post`.

That's it, this is now the data we would use in our receiving client.

**Note**: We can also see more information like headers, data, cookies and so on in the buttom.

## Front-end with JSON data

You might ask that how can we create UI for our page with JSON? Is that possible? Isn't it a format for text?

One thing to say, **yes we can**. For that, we need to go to the Codepen website which is <https://codepen.io/pen/> and work with front-end; or we can write them manually in Vs Code, for example:

```html
<!-- index.html body -->
<button id="get">get</button>
<button id="post">post</button>
```

```js
// app.js - separated from the main `app.js`
const getButton = document.getElementById("get");
const postButton = document.getElementById("post");
```

Then we add a click event on it:

```js
// app.js - separated from the main `app.js`
getButton.addEventListener("click", () => {

})
```

In there, we'll use the `fetch()` API which is built into modern browsers:

```js
// app.js - separated from the main `app.js`
getButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  fetch("http://localhost:8080/feed/posts")
    .then(response => response.json())
    .then(responseData => console.log(responseData))
    .catch(error => console.log(error));
});
```

We get an error with fetching resource here with this **index.html:1 Access to fetch at 'http://localhost:8080/feed/posts' from origin 'https://cdpn.io' has been blocked by CORS policy: No `'Access-Control-Allow-Origin'` header is present on the requested resource. If an opaque response serves your needs, set the request's mode to `'no-cors'` to fetch the resource with CORS disabled.** message. How can fix this? We'll teach you in the next section.

## CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing)

CORS stands for **C**ross-**O**rigin **R**esource **S**haring and by default this is not allowed by browsers.

If we have our client in the server and they run in the same domain (e.g. `localhost:3000`), if they run on the same server, we can send requests and responses as we want without any issue. Before, we rendered our HTML files on the server and therefore they were served by the same server as we send our requests to.

If client and server run on different domains (i.e. client: `localhost:4000` and server: `localhost:3000`), we'll have issues and we get a CORS error. Because it's a security mechanism provided by the browser that we can't share resources across domains (servers or origins).

However, we can overwrite this, we want to allow our server to share its data. We want to offer data from our server to different clients; and these clients will often not be served by the same server as our API runs on. For example, we're not running our app on Google servers, still we can access it; and the same is true for our own API.

We need to tell the browser that it may accept the response sent by our server. To tell the browser, we have to change something on the server:

```js
// app.js
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*"); // ACAO -> all domains can access our server
  res.setHeader(
    "Access-Control-Allow-Methods",
    "GET, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE"
  );
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Headers", "Content-Type, Authorization");
  next();
});
```

Now every response that we send, will have these headers. Now we set appropriate CORS headers on the server.

Then if we click on `get` button, we'll see:

```js
🡻{post: Array(1)}
  🡻post: Array(1)
    0: {title: "First product", content: "A greate book"}
    length: 1
    __proto__: Array(0)
  __proto__: Object
```

## Sending POST requests with CORS Security

We can easily send requests to our sever with:

```js
// app.js - separated from the main `app.js`
postButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  fetch("http://localhost:8080/feed/post", { method: "POST" })
    .then(response => response.json())
    .then(responseData => console.log(responseData))
    .catch(error => console.log(error));
});
```

Then if we click on `post` button, we'll see:

```js
🡻{message: "Post created successfully!", post: {…}}
    message: "Post created successfully!"
    post: {id: "2021-01-11T13:12:50.867Z"}
    __proto__: Object
```

It works good, but we see that the `title` and `content` are missing. Because we didn't send that data. To fix that, we need to add `body` key in here:

```js
// app.js - separated from the main `app.js`
postButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  fetch("http://localhost:8080/feed/post", {
    method: "POST",
    body: {
      title: "My title",
      content: "My content in there"
    }
  })
    .then(response => response.json())
    .then(responseData => console.log(responseData))
    .catch(error => console.log(error));
});
```

It's work as before even we add `body` here, because if go to the **Network** tab in developer tools, we see that the **Content-Type** is `text/plain` instead of `application/json`. At the first, we need to convert the `body` to JSON data:

```js
// app.js - separated from the main `app.js`
postButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  fetch("http://localhost:8080/feed/post", {
    method: "POST",
    body: JSON.stringify({
      title: "My title",
      content: "My content in there"
    })
  })
    .then(response => response.json())
    .then(responseData => console.log(responseData))
    .catch(error => console.log(error));
});
```

If we go the **Network** tab again and see the last section, we'll see the **Request Payload** in here that contains:

```js
{title: "My title", content: "My content in there"}
```

Before it was `[Object object]`. Now we want to change the header which is `text/plain`, to `application/json`, to do that, we need to add `headers` key in there:

```js
// app.js - separated from the main `app.js`
postButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  fetch("http://localhost:8080/feed/post", {
    method: "POST",
    body: JSON.stringify({
      title: "My title",
      content: "My content in there"
    }),
    headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" }
  })
    .then(response => response.json())
    .then(responseData => console.log(responseData))
    .catch(error => console.log(error));
});
```

Now it's work correctly and we also see the `title` and `content` in here.

**Note**: If you delete or comment out the one of the headers which are `Access-Control-xxxxx`, it would be failed. So you do allow this by adding these headers on the server-side.

So this is how we communicate between client and server.

**Warning**: Don't worry to getting two `post` request. First request is your `POST` request and the second `post` is a machanism the browser uses to see if the next request which it wants to view, the `post` request will succeed if  it is allowed. The default header in there is `OPTIONS` and that automatically added by the browser and you don't want to do anything.

That's it, you learn alot about CORS security and REST API basics.

## More on CORS

CORS is a security mechanism and forced by the browser that makes sure that server A can't send a request to server B and get data (response) from it. Server B instead needs to allow that.

If we have a front-end application running on server A (e.g. React single page application running on `localhost:3000`), and we have our other back-end application running on server B (e.g. REST API running on `localhost:8000`); then the communication from A to B will not be possible.

By default, browsers prevent `GET`, `POST` ,`PATCH`, `DELETE` and etc requests if front-end and back-end server are not the same one.

This is a default security mechanism. However, we can tell the browser that we do want to allow access; we have to set this setting on the server where we do host the data (i.e. in REST API or back-end). We can set specific response headers to the responses we sent back to the front-end application. With that, the server allows this kind of communication!

**Note**: This is just a browser security mechanism which **we had no problems, fetching and storing data with postman**. The postman doesn't care about this CORS thing.

## Summary

**REST Concepts**:

- REST APIs are all about data, no UI logic is exchanged.
- REST APIs are normal Node server whcih expose different endpoints(HTTP method + path) for clients to send request to.
- JSON is the common data format that is used both for requests and responses, we don't return html pages as the response anymore.
- REST APIs are decoupled from the clients that used them. As we mentioned before, they don't share any connection history or store any connction history.

**Requests & Responses**:

- We should attach data in JSON format and let the other end know by setting the `"Content-Type"` header. Express.js does this automatically when using the JSON method; but in the browser, it depends on which method we use. When using the `fetch()` API, we had to set it manually, when we would use `axios` library (in the next module), it would be done automatically for browsers.
- CORS errors occur when using an API that does not set CORS headers. To fix them, we need to pass correct CORS headers which tell the client **hey, it's fine; I'm a public API, you may use my data**.

## Useful Resources & Links

- Example: Build a Complete RESTful API from Scratch: <https://academind.com/learn/node-js/building-a-restful-api-with/>
