# Beyond Web Servers

In this file, you will learn about: npm & Node as a Build Tool

If we install the **Node.js**, two things will be installed, **one** is `Node` environment and **two** is `npm` (Node Package Manager).

With **Node.js**, we can execute code exactly like **JavaScript**. We can also interact with Files with **Node.js**.

With `npm`, we can manage our packages and control our app with those packages. We can also run **scripts** with the help of `npm` (e.g. `npm start` and `npm run my-test`).

## What is `npm`

`npm` stands for Node Package Manager. In the end, it's a CLI (command line interface). We always used it from the **command line** (**terminal**) by running `npm` and then some command (mostly `npm install` of course).

We can use `npm` not just to install packages, but also to create and share packages. Through that `npm` repository which is a cloud service where we don't have to pay for, where we can host packages we created and this is also a **service where we'll in the end fetch packages from with `npm install`command**. We can work with project by installing some useful packages with `npm install <package>` command and that is how we add packages to our project.

We can install a specific version of package with `@`, for example, we want to install the old version of express, so we can write:

```powershell
npm install express@4.16.3
```

If we select no version, the latest one is picked by default.

When installing a package with `npm install --save` or `--save-dev` (or `--save-prod`, which replaces `--save`), we end up with entries in our `package.json` file, that look something like this: `"express": "^4.16.3"`.

What does the `^` mean?

You can learn about all available version annotations / syntaxes here: <https://docs.npmjs.com/misc/semver#versions>.

This post on Stackoverflow provides a great summary: <https://stackoverflow.com/a/25861938>.

## Help

We can read and learn more about `npm` with `npm help` or `npm -h` command.

We can get help of installing packages with the help of `help` for example:

```powershell
npm install --h

# output
npm install (with no args, in package dir)
npm install [<@scope>/]<pkg>
npm install [<@scope>/]<pkg>@<tag>
npm install [<@scope>/]<pkg>@<version>
npm install [<@scope>/]<pkg>@<version range>
npm install <alias>@npm:<name>
npm install <folder>
npm install <tarball file>
npm install <tarball url>
npm install <git:// url>
npm install <github username>/<github project>

aliases: i, isntall, add
common options: [--save-prod|--save-dev|--save-optional] [--save-exact] [--no-save]
```

## Build Tool

As you know, Node can execute any `.js` file! We always used the `npm` for web servers; but if you remember, we can read and write files with it. So we can parse (read) files with **Node.js**. We can also manipulate content with it and output the manipulated content back into the original file or into a new file. That is the idea behind so-called **build tools**.

That is something **Node.js** also is capable of being use for. We use build tools to optimize our code.

## Useful Resources & Links

- Official npm Docs: <https://docs.npmjs.com/>

- Learn more about Webpack (a build tool using Node.js): <https://academind.com/learn/webpack>
