# Improved Development Workflow and Debugging

In this file, you will learn about:

- Using Node Package Manager
- Fixing Errors
- Developing Efficiently

## Node Package Manager

We can write easier code with some packages, third-party packages or frameworks. We can install them with `npm` command. Before using that, we need to install that. `npm` should install with **Node.js**.

First of all, we need to write `npm init` for node package manager initialization (configuration). This will not delete our code or anything like that, no worries.

We'll prompted with a couple of questions here:

1. It'll ask us first of all for a name of our package. The part in the `()` here always is the suggestion, the default name.
2. We can set a version of our package name. We can hit enter for default value (1.0.0).
3. We can add some description in here (we can leave it empty).
4. We can skip the entry point (we don't need that for now) by pressing enter.
5. We can skip the test command (we don't need that for now). We repeat this steps in **git repository** and **keyword**.
6. We can add an author name to our project (e.g. `Hamid Alavi`).
7. We can choose a license, we put it empty for now.
8. Finally we press the `enter` button to create our `package.json` file.

This file contains:

```json
{
  "name": "http_modern",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Complete Node.js Course",
  "main": "app.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "author": "Hamid Alavi",
  "license": "ISC"
}
```

We can add our own scripts here in `script` section:

```json
{
  "name": "http_modern",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Complete Node.js Course",
  "main": "app.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
    "start": "node app.js" // start -> script | node app.js -> command
  },
  "author": "Hamid Alavi",
  "license": "ISC"
}
```

Now we added our own `start` script. We can run it via `npm start` command.

**Note1**: Script name must wrap by `"` double quotation marks.
**Note2**: This script likes that we write `node app.js` command in terminal.
**Note3**: If we want to use custom script like `start-server`, we need to run via `npm run start-server` command. If we use `npm start-server`, we get an error, that's not a known command. `start` just was the special case.

Sometimes we use some core packages (e.g. `fs`, `http`, `path`, etc) but often this does not suffice. Because we have such dependencies third-party packages (e.g. `express`, `body-parser`, etc). We want to use some functionalities some code which we didn't write on our own but which is also not included into **Node.js**.

## Installing Packages

1. We can install any package with `npm install <package-name>`. We can define how this should be installed. Because packages which we install, can be divided into development packages.

2. We can tell `npm` which kind of dependency this is. We do add this by adding `--save-dev`. For example `npm install nodemon --save-dev`. With this command, we know that we use that package in **development mode** (usage). If we use `npm install nodemon --save`, it's uses for the **production mode**.

3. There also third option by the way, `-g`. We'll not install it in this project, but globally on our machine. So that we can use it (i.e. package) anywhere.

For example, we use the second one:

```powershell
npm install nodemon --save-dev
```

**Warning**: If you want to use packages globally in MAC and GNU/Linux, you need to write `sudo` in front of your command, for example `sudo npm install -g nodemon`

**Note1**: It will download this package from the `npm` repository.

**Note2**: You can set the `--save-dev`, `--save` or `-g` before or after the package name. For example, `npm install --save-dev nodemon`.

`nodemon` is a tool that helps develop **Node.js** based applications by automatically restarting the node application when file changes in the directory are detected.

After installation, it gives us a couple of new things in our project. It gives us that `node_modules` folder (directory) and the `package-lock.json` file and it updated the `package.json` file:

```json
{
  "name": "http_modern",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Complete Node.js Course",
  "main": "app.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
    "start": "node app.js"
  },
  "author": "Hamid Alavi",
  "license": "ISC",
  "devDependencies": {
    "nodemon": "^2.0.6"
  }
}
```

As you can see, the new `"devDependencies"` section was added and that stands for **development dependencies**.

If you have some outdated packages in your project, you can use `npm install` command to install newer version of those packages.

**Note**: You can always delete that `node_modules` folder if you need to free up space. Now you can't use that package, but you can then rerun `npm install` if you start working on that project again and it will reinstall this package and all its pure dependencies and therefore recreate the `node_modules` folder. This is how packages work in node projects.

We can't use `nodemon` in global sight (i.e `nodemon app.js`). But we can use it locally with `npm start` if our `package.json` file contains:

```json
{
  "name": "http_modern",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Complete Node.js Course",
  "main": "app.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
    "start": "nodemon app.js"
  },
  "author": "Hamid Alavi",
  "license": "ISC",
  "devDependencies": {
    "nodemon": "^2.0.6"
  }
}
```

**Note**: You can also use `nodemon` in global sight with `npm install -g nodemon`. But we don't recommend you to use this command.

## Types of Errors

There are three kinds of errors:

- Syntax Error
- Runtime Error
- Logical Error

> Syntax Error

Sometimes we have some typos in our code; for example, we write `cons` instead of `const` or we forget to put opening or closing curly braces.

> Runtime Error

Sometimes everything is ok and we don't have any syntax error, but when we run our project (via `node` or `nodemon`), we get an error and we must find the problem (e.g. we writing some code after the `return` keyword or don't using the `return` keyword):

```js
const requestHandler = (request, response) => {
  const url = request.url;
  const method = request.method;

  if (url === "/") {
    response.write(`
      <html>
  <head>
      <title>Form</title>
  </head>

  <body>
      <form method="POST" action="/message">
          <input type="text" name="message">
          <button type="submit">Send</button>
      </form>
  </body>

  </html>
      `);
     response.end();
  }

  if (url === "/message" && method === "POST") {
    const body = [];
    request.on("data", chunk => {
      console.log(chunk);
      body.push(chunk);
    });
    return request.on("end", () => {
      const parsedBody = Buffer.concat(body).toString();
      const message = parsedBody.split("=")[1];
      fs.writeFile("message.txt", message, err => {
        console.log(err);
        response.statusCode = 302;
        response.setHeader("Location", "/");
        return response.end();
      });
    });
  }
  response.setHeader("Content-Type", "text/html");
  response.write(`
    <html lang="en">

  <head>
      <title>Document</title>
  </head>

  <body>
      <h1>Hello world!</h1>
  </body>

  </html>
    `);
  response.end();
};
```

In this example, we would get an error, because we don't stop the execution after we're in a main page (i.e `/`). For fixing this problem, we must put `return` in front of `response.end()`:

```js
  if (url === "/") {
    response.write(`
      <html>
  <head>
      <title>Form</title>
  </head>

  <body>
      <form method="POST" action="/message">
          <input type="text" name="message">
          <button type="submit">Send</button>
      </form>
  </body>

  </html>
      `);
    return response.end();
  }
```

This is a runtime error.

> Logical Error

Sometimes times we go wrong way with our code, for example:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 3];
console.log(array[0]);
```

It works well, but we wanted to print the second value. Here we had a logical problem.

We (you) can also use **Node.js** debugger for solving our problems. Learn more in [this](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/nodejs/nodejs-debugging) link.

**Note**: You can edit the variables that in the debugger with double click.

## Summary

**`npm`**:

- `npm` stands for **Node Package Manager** and it allows us to manage our Node project and its dependencies.
- We can initialize a project with `npm init`.
- `npm` scripts can be defined in the `package.json` to give us **shortcuts** to common tasks / commands.

**Third-party Packages**:

- Node projects typically don't just use core modules and custom code, but also third-party packages.
- We install them via `npm`.
- We can differentiate between production dependencies (`--save`), development dependencies (`--save-dev`) and global dependencies (`-g`).

**Types of Errors**:

- Syntax, runtime and logical errors can break our app.
- Syntax and runtime errors throw (helpful) error messages (with line number!).
- Logical errors can be fixed with testing and the help of the debugger.

**Debugging**:

- Using the Vs Code Node debugger to step into our code and go through it step by step.
- Analyze variable values at runtime.
- Look into variables at runtime and manipulate them.
- Set breakpoints cleverly (i.e. respect the async / event-driven nature).

## Useful Resources & Links

- More on debugging **Node.js**: <https://nodejs.org/en/docs/guides/debugging-getting-started/>

- Debugging Node in Visual Studio Code: <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/nodejs/nodejs-debugging>
