# An Introduction to Deno

In this file, you will learn about: Deno Basics

## Basics

Deno is a **JavaScript** runtime based on Chrome's V8 **JavaScript** engine. Deno allows us to run **JavaScript** outside of the browser, just like **Node.js**.

Deno have more features:

- Deno is not only a **JavaScript** runtime, but actually a **JavaScript** and **TypeScript** runtime. Node executable is only capable of executing **JavaScript** code; **TypeScript** code needs to be compiled to **JavaScript** code first. But Deno **is capable of executing uncompiled TypeScript code**. Because Deno has its own built-in **TypeScript** compiler.

- Deno supports URL imports and modern **JavaScript** features (e.g. Promises).

- Deno is **secure by defualt** and requires explicit execution permissions (we cover it later).

## Deno vs Node

|Deno|Node|
|:-:|:-:|
|**TypeScript** support|Only **JavaScript**|
|Based on modern **JavaScript** features|Modern **JavaScript** features are missing & uses older **JavaScript** in some of its core modules|
|Support URL imports|Custom module system|
|Script or execution permissions (e.g. `allow-net` and etc)|No script permissions|
|Pretty new, small ecosystem, not used in production by major companies yet, smaller base of maintainers, not really used in production yet, will have bugs|Mature & established, highly active ecosystem, used by thousands of big companies, huge base of maintainers, production-proven, no major bugs|

## Deno Setup

We can install Deno in <https://deno.land/#installation> address.

**Note**: In Windows, you need to install it in the **PowerShell**, not on the normal command prompt.

We use Deno in Windows operation system. So we copy `iwr https://deno.land/x/install/install.ps1 -useb | iex` from that URL and hit enter (return) to install it (in PowerShell).

After installation we see this message:

```powershell
Deno was installed successfully to C:\Users\myUser\.deno\bin\deno.exe
Run 'deno --help' to get started
```

**Important**: In some operation systems, it might have problem with environment variables. If you use MAC, see your user path and search for `.zprofile`. If you didn't found it, it might be hidden in your machine. You can show hidden files with `CMD + Shift + .`. Enter this file and paste that (those) variable to `.zprofile`. After pasting this or these variables, you need to rerun your Shell.

If we write `deno` in PowerShell (Windows) or Shell (MAC and Linux), we enter the Deno REPL (Read, Evaluate, Print, Loop).

## Get Started with Deno

If we want to work with Deno in Vs Code terminal (not just in PowerShell), we can install `Deno` extension in Vs Code and restart our Vs Code program. With this extension, we can work with Deno in all terminals like `bash`, `powershell`, `zsh`, `WSL bash`, `Git bash` and so on.

Let's try our first code here:

```ts
// app.ts
let message: string;

message = "Hello there!";

console.log(message);
```

We can run this code via `deno run app.ts` (or whatever you choose in your alias in `.bashrc` file e.g. `deno="deno run"`).

**Note**: In Deno, you should use `deno run <file>`, before we used `node <file>` for **Node.js**. This is a little different.

## Runtime or Namespace APIs (Built-in Utilities)

In **Node.js** we worked with core module (like `http`, `fs`, `setTimeout`, `setInteral` and so on). In Deno it's the same and it's called **runtime APIs** or **namespace APIs**. These core APIs which are built into Deno. In **Node.js** we also had some core APIs (features), but the `fetch()` API to sending http requests is not available in Node.

**Note**: DOM is not available in both Node and Deno. Because they don't run in browser.

To use runtime APIs, we need to install Deno extension in Vs Code and use `Deno` global object. For example, we want to write some data to a text file (like `fs.writeFile()` in Node):

```ts
// app.ts
const text = "This is a test - and it should be stored in a file";

Deno.writeFile("message.txt", text);
```

**Important**: If you have an error on `Deno` global object (undefined), you need to go to the `Deno` extension setting and tick each checkbox in there to fix that problem (hint: `Enable` and `Unstable` are important, we need to make them `true` or checked).

This wouldn't work, because it needs a data which has `Uint8Array` format. We can encode this string with `TextEncoder` global object which is provided by Deno:

```ts
// app.ts
const text = "This is a test - and it should be stored in a file";

const encoder = new TextEncoder();
const data = encoder.encode(text);

Deno.writeFile("message.txt", data);
```

It returns the result of running UTF-8's encoder. As we mentioned, Deno support Promises in core APIs, so we can use `.then()` and `.catch()` block here:

```ts
// app.ts
const text = "This is a test - and it should be stored in a file";

const encoder = new TextEncoder();
const data = encoder.encode(text);

Deno.writeFile("message.txt", data).then(() => {
  console.log("Wrote to file!");
});
```

Now If we execute (run) this code with `deno run app.ts`, it would be failed because of **TypeScript** permission (the error message is `Uncaught (in promise) PermissionDenied`). As we mentioned, Deno is secure in built-in.

## Working with Permissions

If we wanna execute this code, it compiles, but it does not execute, **but instead throw an error**. This isn't a bug with Deno or this is not an error in our code, instead this is a Deno feature. Because of Deno security permission.

This **not** means that hackers can't hack our code, always there is a hole that hackers can infiltrate to our code. It means that when we run a script with Deno, that script does not by default have all possible permissions. For example, something like reading and writing files or sending network requests or listening to network requests.

We have to set the appropriate permissions. We have to let Deno know that we want to be able to write to a file. Before we running this script with `deno run app.ts`, we need to add extra flags to this execution; to write data to a file, we need to add `--allow-write` flag on execution:

```powershell
deno run --allow-write app.ts
```

We can deny to write that data in a incorrect file with:

```powershell
deno run --allow-write=message.txt app.ts
```

With this command, other files could not be written to. We can add more files in permission with `,` comma like `--allow-write=message.txt,file2,file3`.

## Same Code for Node

Consider this code:

```ts
// app.ts
const text = "This is a test - and it should be stored in a file";

const encoder = new TextEncoder();
const data = encoder.encode(text);

Deno.writeFile("message.txt", data).then(() => {
  console.log("Wrote to file!");
});
```

We can write this code exactly in **Node.js** environment. But, one core difference compared to Deno for `writeFile()`:

1. The data could be just a string; we can also pass in such a bytes array, but that is just can be a string.

2. This method does not return a promise, instead we pass in a callback here. But we don't want it.

3. We can write this code like `fs.writeFileSync("node-message.txt", text);`, but it blocks the rest of the code and we don't want to block the code execution.

4. As you learned, we can use `promises` in `fs` module:

```js
// app.js
const fs = require("fs").promises;

const text = "This is a test - and it should be stored in a file";

fs.writeFile("node-message.txt", text);
```

We can now add `.then()` and `.catch()` block here, because now it based on promise:

```js
// app.js
const fs = require("fs").promises;

const text = "This is a test - and it should be stored in a file";

fs.writeFile("node-message.txt", text).then(() => {
  console.log("Wrote to file!");
});
```

To execute this script with Node, we just need to write `node app.js` command, because as we mentioned, scripts executed with Node by default have **full read and write access**. They can do anything.

This is can be issue because if we're running a script from a source which we don't know, we have to trust that script to make sure it's not doing anything harmful.

**Note**: If you get an Lint error our auto completion, we need to uncheck the `Enable`and `Lint` and `Unstable` or just disabling `Deno` extension.

**Keywords**: Permission, Promise, **TypeScript**.

## Compare Libraries and Core APIs

|Deno namespace APIs (built-in utilities|Standard library (maintained by Deno team)|Third-party library (maintained by community)|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|Stable & maintained by core team|Unstable & maintained by core team|Stability differs & maintained by community teams|
|Built-into Deno, no installation or imports required (like `Deno.writeFile()`)|Needs to be imported into scripts to be used|Needs to be imported into scripts to be used|
|Only a small set of low-level core functionalities|Builds up on core, low-level functionalities to provide **easier to use functionalities**|Builds up on core, low-level functionalities to provide **easier to use functionalities**|

The standard library builds up on those core APIs and makes working with those APIs easier.

## Important Note We Before Starting the Next Section

When it comes to **Deno imports**, we use ES Modules with URLs that point at the files you want to import.

These can be **local files** (import something from `'./file.ts';`) but these can also be **remote files** (`import { serve } from 'https://deno.land/std/http/server.ts';`).

Here are a couple of useful information on those remote imports:

1. To get better auto-completion in the IDE, execute your code once and let Deno download + cache those remote files locally. Thereafter, you should get better autocompletion.

2. If you ever want to force Deno to re-fetch the remote files (i.e. to clear the local cache and download again), you can do so by executing your script with the `--reload` flag (e.g. `deno run --reload file.ts`).

3. If you want to lock in a certain version for a remote file, you can do so: `import { serve } from 'https://deno.land/std@0.51.0/http/server.ts';`.

4. If you still have bugs in your code, make sure that you write correct code, otherwise close all `app.ts` files and run Deno language server via `deno run --allow-all --reload <file>`.

## Using the Standard Library

We work with `http` library here which is not core API in Deno (namespace).

In this section, we don't import a local file or a module, but where we instead point at a file on the another server (URL) to import that file. That's something Deno does.

We don't have to download everything we're going to use in our project and store it locally, instead we can import from any **JavaScript** or **TypeScript** file on any server.

So we can import `http` library just with this following command:

```ts
import { serve } from "https://deno.land/std@0.85.0/http/server.ts";
```

**Note**: Always search `http in deno` in google and import the newest version of this package.

As you can see, we just imported an URL, we didn't add module in our local file directory.

Now `serve` is a function that allows us to spin up with HTTP server. We spin up that server by calling `serve()`.

**Note**: If you see some Lint error (red underline in URL), don't be worry, you just need to fetch module data (on hovering on it or `ctrl + .`  in Vs Code) or run that file with `deno run --allow-net <file>` to download all requirements and you see the error will be gone.

Then through `serve()` function, we pass an object to configure it:

```ts
// app.ts
serve({ port: 3000 });
```

In the end, `serve()` is a server and we can store it into a `server` constant:

```ts
// app.ts
const server = serve({ port: 3000 });
```

Let's see this <https://deno.land/std@0.85.0/http> (or newer version) link and go through the `http` title:

```ts
// app.ts
for await (const req of server) {
  req.respond({ body: "Hello World\n" });
}
```

`for await ( of )` is a **JavaScript** feature, it's not Deno exclusive which it's called **async iterable**. `server` is so-called asynchronous iterable, this means that this `server` generates new promises. It's means that if one of those request fails, overall server will not crash.

**Note**: If you see some lint error under the some keywords like `await` (for top-level using), you can add these options to Vs Code setting:

```json
// settings.json
{
  "deno.enable": true, // enable deno extension
  "deno.lint": true, // lint the Deno language server
  "deno.unstable": true, // supports some unstable APIs or namespaces

  "deno.import_intellisense_origins": {
        "https://deno.land": true // add intellisense from imports - don't have to add it
    },
}
```

or enabling checkboxes in `Deno` extension. You can also type `deno` in command palette (with `Ctrl+Shift+P` or `F1`) and select `deno:Init` option to initialize the Deno language server.

If we run this code with `deno run app.ts`, all files will be downloaded with **an error**. That error is a network request permission; we need to add `--allow-net` flag on execution. With this flag, it download imports and cache them to disk:

```powershell
deno run --allow-net app.ts
```

Deno caches remote imports in a special directory specified by the `DENO_DIR` environment variable. It defaults to the system's cache directory if `DENO_DIR` is not specified. The next time we run the program, no downloads will be made. If the program hasn't changed, it won't be recompiled either. The default directory is:

- On Linux/Redox: `$XDG_CACHE_HOME/deno or $HOME/.cache/deno`
- On Windows: `%LOCALAPPDATA%/deno (%LOCALAPPDATA% = FOLDERID_LocalAppData)`
- On macOS: `$HOME/Library/Caches/deno`
- If something fails, it falls back to `$HOME/.deno`

So if we compare the `http` library (for creating a web server) in Deno and Node, we'll have:

```ts
// app.ts
import { serve } from "https://deno.land/std@0.85.0/http/server.ts";
const server = serve({ port: 3000 });

for await (const req of server) {
  req.respond({ body: "Hello World\n" });
}
```

```js
// app.js
const http = require("http");

const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.end("Hello there!");
});

server.listen(3000);
```

We see core differences like the import syntax (Node available locally and Deno reach out to the server) and listening statically (Node) and dynamically (Deno) with that processing requests (`for..of` loop).

## Oak Framework

Oak is a middleware-focused Deno framework for building web application. It's not directly inspired by **Express**, but by **Koa** which is another framework that exists for **Node.js** (we haven't covered this framework in this course).

**Note**: Koa inspired by Express framework.

Let's write some code with Oak framework. You can get ready for Oak basics in <https://github.com/oakserver/oak> URL.

```ts
// app.ts
import { Application } from "https://deno.land/x/oak/mod.ts";

const app = new Application();

app.use(ctx => {
  ctx.response.body = "Hello World!";
});

await app.listen({ port: 3000 });
```

Instead of getting `req` (i.e. request) object, `res` (i.e. response) object, here we get a `ctx` object (i.e. context) and we can also add `next` function as a second argument.

The context holds a reference to a request and response objects. **Request and response objects are summarized in one `ctx` object**.

The interesting part is that the body is automatically parse and just need to write `ctx.response.body`; if it's urlencoded, it's parses the body requests and if it's JSON data, it's also parses the body requests and we don't need to install additional package like `body-parser`.

**Note**: Oak always automatically sends back a response.

## REST API with Node and Deno

**JavaScript** with **Node.js** project:

```js
// app.js
const express = require("express");
const bodyParser = require("body-parser");
const todosRouter = require("./routes/todos");

const app = express();

app.use(bodyParser.json());
app.use(todosRouter);

app.listen(3000);
```

```js
// todos.js - in `routes` folder
const express = require("express");
const router = express.Router();

let todos = [];

router.get("/todos", (req, res, next) => {
  res.status(200).json({ todos });
});

router.post("/todos", (req, res, next) => {
  const newTodo = { id: new Date().getTime().toString(), text: req.body.text };
  todos.push(newTodo);
  res.status(201).json({ message: "Todo created", todo: newTodo });
});

router.put("/todos/:todoId", (req, res, next) => {
  const tid = req.params.todoId;
  const todoIndex = todos.findIndex(todo => todo.id === tid);
  todos[todoIndex] = { id: todos[todoIndex].id, text: req.body.text };
  res.status(200).json({ message: "Todo updated!" });
});

router.delete("/todos/:todoId", (req, res, next) => {
  const tid = req.params.todoId;
  todos = todos.filter(todo => todo.id !== tid); // does match: deleted | doesn't match: kept (current)
  res.status(200).json({ message: "Todo deleted!" });
});

module.exports = router;
```

**TypeScript** with **Deno** project:

```ts
// app.ts
import { Application } from "https://deno.land/x/oak/mod.ts";

import todoRouter from "./routes/todos.ts";

const app = new Application();

app.use(todoRouter.routes()); // should register both to make sure that Oak handles incoming requests to our routes
app.use(todoRouter.allowedMethods()); // should register both to make sure that Oak handles incoming requests to our routes

await app.listen({ port: 3000 });
```

```ts
// app.ts - in `routes` folder
import { Router } from "https://deno.land/x/oak/mod.ts";

const router = new Router();

interface Todo {
  id: string;
  text: string;
}

let todos: Todo[] = [];

router.get("/todos", ctx => {
  ctx.response.body = { todos };
});
router.post("/todos", async ctx => {
  const newTodo: Todo = {
    id: new Date().getTime().toString(),
    text: await ctx.request.body().value
  };
  todos.push(newTodo);
  ctx.response.body = { message: "Todo Created!", todo: newTodo };
});
router.put("/todos/:todoId", async ctx => { // we need `async` for body requests
  const tid = ctx.params.todoId;
  const todoIndex = todos.findIndex(todo => todo.id === tid);
  todos[todoIndex] = {
    id: todos[todoIndex].id,
    text: await ctx.request.body().value
  };
  ctx.response.body = { message: "Todo updated!" };
});
router.delete("/todos/:todoId", ctx => {
  const tid = ctx.params.todoId;
  todos = todos.filter(todo => todo.id !== tid); // does match: deleted | doesn't match: kept (current)
  ctx.response.body = { message: "Todo deleted!" };
});

export default router;
```

Here, in the Deno REST API project, there is a tricky way; we mentioned that (in side Note) **Oak** always automatically sends back a response. It does so, whenever it's done executing a middleware (any middleware, not all middlewares). Consider this snippet:

```ts
// app.ts
app.use((ctx, next) => {
  console.log("Middleware!");
  next();
});
```

When this middleware (after `app` initialized) is done, it'll sends back a response. Now because we're calling `next()`, you might think that this middleware is only done once these route middlewares (i.e. `app.use(todoRouter.routes());` and `app.use(todoRouter.allowedMethods());`) also ran. We start running these route middlewares with `next()`, but with `next()` we don't wait for that.

**Important**: In the route middleware (or in `todos.ts` file in `routes` folder), we're doing some asynchronous stuff. We got the `async` keyword because we're for example parsing request bodies. So our route middlewares actually will **return promises** which only are done once the asynchronous stuff in there finish.

Here, in `app.ts`, the `next()` function will not wait for that; therefore we need to send back a response before the route has been able to process the request. Therefore, **whenever we have any middlewares that doing asynchronous stuff, we should make all our middlewares ansync and always `await` for `next()`**:

```ts
// app.ts
app.use(async (ctx, next) => {
  console.log("Middleware!");
  await next();
});
```

This tells Oak that we don't just want to start the next middlewares in line, but we want to wait for them to finish, before we send back that automatically generated response. **Otherwise the response bodies set by our asyc route middlewares (in `todos.ts` file) will not be taken into account**.

## CORS in Deno

If you have two apps which are in front-end and back-end, the CORS security will shine here. To make sure that server A can send a request to server B and get data (response) from it, we need to set some specific headers here. To set a header in Deno, we can use Oak framework here:

```ts
// app.ts
app.use((ctx, next) => {
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");
});
```

This controls of which other domains will be allowed to access our resources. We set the `*` which means that every domain may send the request. We also have another header to set:

```ts
// app.ts
app.use((ctx, next) => {
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Methods", "GET, POST, PUT, DELETE");
});
```

This controls which kind of HTTP methods can be used for requests being sent to this back-end. There is a last header that we should use for CORS security:

```ts
// app.ts
app.use((ctx, next) => {
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Methods", "GET, POST, PUT, DELETE");
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Headers", "Content-Type");
});
```

This allows which headers set by the front-end when it requests data. We should set it to `Content-Type` header.

**Important**: Our route middlewares do use `async` keyword, we do have promises in there. We should await for those actions to complete before the response is sent back. We do this by `next()`:

```ts
// app.ts
import { Application } from "https://deno.land/x/oak/mod.ts";

import todoRouter from "./routes/todos.ts";

const app = new Application();

app.use(async (ctx, next) => {
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Methods", "GET, POST, PUT, DELETE");
  ctx.response.headers.set("Acceess-Control-Allow-Headers", "Content-Type");
  await next(); // <-- this line
});

app.use(async (ctx, next) => {
  console.log("Middleware!");
  await next();
});

app.use(todoRouter.routes()); // should register both to make sure that Oak handles incoming requests to our routes
app.use(todoRouter.allowedMethods()); // should register both to make sure that Oak handles incoming requests to our routes

await app.listen({ port: 3000 });
```

## MongoDB in Deno

We can also use MongoDB database in our Deno application. To do that, we need to googling for `mongo for deno` and import the latest version of MongoDB database:

```ts
// db.ts - in `helpers` folder
import { MongoClient } from "https://deno.land/x/mongo@v0.21.0/mod.ts";
```

Then we connect to our database with full code:

```js
// db.ts - in `helpers` folder
const client = new MongoClient();
await client.connect(
  "mongodb+srv://hamid:1yN49snBKxXgzued@testcluster.xdext.mongodb.net?/retryWrites=true&w=majority"
);

const db = client.database("todo-app");
```

We can do it with a better approach:

```ts
// db.ts - in `helpers` folder
import {
  MongoClient,
  Database
} from "https://deno.land/x/mongo@v0.21.0/mod.ts";

let db: Database;

function connect() {
  const client = new MongoClient();
  await client.connect(
    "mongodb+srv://hamid:1yN49snBKxXgzued@testcluster.xdext.mongodb.net?/retryWrites=true&w=majority"
  );

  db = client.database("todo-app");
}

function getDB() {
  return db;
}
```

We can export `connect` and `getDB` function as well (with `export` keyword) and add `connect` to our main app:

```ts
// app.ts
import { connect } from "./helpers/db.ts";

connect();
```

and `getDB` to our `routes` folder:

```js
// todos.ts - in `routes` folder
import { getDB } from "../helpers/db.ts";
```

Then we have full back-end (with no front-end) REST API application with Deno:

```ts
// app.ts
import { Application } from "https://deno.land/x/oak/mod.ts";

import todosRoutes from './routes/todos.ts';
import { connect } from './helpers/db_client.ts';

connect();

const app = new Application();

app.use(async (ctx, next) => {
  console.log('Middleware!');
  await next();
});

app.use(async (ctx, next) => {
  ctx.response.headers.set('Access-Control-Allow-Origin', '*');
  ctx.response.headers.set('Access-Control-Allow-Methods', 'GET, POST, PUT, DELETE');
  ctx.response.headers.set('Access-Control-Allow-Headers', 'Content-Type');
  await next();
});

app.use(todosRoutes.routes());
app.use(todosRoutes.allowedMethods());

await app.listen({ port: 8000 });
```

```ts
// todos.ts - in `routes` folder
import { Router } from 'https://deno.land/x/oak/mod.ts';
import { ObjectId } from 'https://deno.land/x/mongo@v0.8.0/mod.ts';

import { getDb } from '../helpers/db_client.ts';

const router = new Router();

interface Todo {
  id?: string;
  text: string;
}

router.get('/todos', async (ctx) => {
  const todos = await getDb().collection('todos').find(); // { _id: ObjectId(), text: '...' }[]
  const transformedTodos = todos.map(
    (todo: { _id: ObjectId; text: string }) => {
      return { id: todo._id.$oid, text: todo.text };
    }
  );
  ctx.response.body = { todos: transformedTodos };
});

router.post('/todos', async (ctx) => {
  const data = await ctx.request.body();
  const newTodo: Todo = {
    // id: new Date().toISOString(),
    text: data.value.text,
  };

  const id = await getDb().collection('todos').insertOne(newTodo);

  newTodo.id = id.$oid;

  ctx.response.body = { message: 'Created todo!', todo: newTodo };
});

router.put('/todos/:todoId', async (ctx) => {
  const tid = ctx.params.todoId!;
  const data = await ctx.request.body();

  await getDb()
    .collection('todos')
    .updateOne({ _id: ObjectId(tid) }, { $set: { text: data.value.text } });

  ctx.response.body = { message: 'Updated todo' };
});

router.delete('/todos/:todoId', async (ctx) => {
  const tid = ctx.params.todoId!;

  await getDb().collection('todos').deleteOne({ _id: ObjectId(tid) });

  ctx.response.body = { message: 'Deleted todo' };
});

export default router;
```

```ts
// db_client.ts - in `helpers` folder (use `_` in Deno)
import { MongoClient, Database } from 'https://deno.land/x/mongo@v0.8.0/mod.ts';

let db: Database;

export function connect() {
  const client = new MongoClient();
  client.connectWithUri(
    'mongodb+srv://maximilian:D7oZa57WChezq026@cluster0-ntrwp.mongodb.net/?retryWrites=true&w=majority'
  );

  db = client.database('todo-app');
}

export function getDb() {
  return db;
}
```

## Compare Deno with Node

Both languages are great and we recommend you play around with Deno.

But as you know, Deno is very new, you can use Deno for side-projects or dummy projects. It's not bad, but Deno may have some bugs both is development and production.

Node is established and it's not going to go anywhere. If Deno is going to become bigger, learning Node will never be wrong.

The great news for you is if you have knowledge of Node, you can easily switch into Deno language server; otherwise, it's maybe be hard to start with it.

**Important**: You don't have to switch to Deno immediately and make big projects, because Deno have many bugs for know. If you write some code with Deno, you realize that what we say (about linting, fetching, compiling and so on).
